
[//000000001]: # (clock_rfc2822 - Date/Time Utilities)
[//000000002]: # (Generated from file 'rfc2822.man' by tcllib/doctools with format 'markdown')
[//000000003]: # (clock_rfc2822(n) 0.1 tcllib "Date/Time Utilities")

# NAME

clock_rfc2822 - Parsing ISO 8601 dates/times

# <a name='toc'></a>Table Of Contents

  -  [Table Of Contents](#toc)

  -  [Synopsis](#synopsis)

  -  [Description](#section1)

  -  [Bugs, Ideas, Feedback](#section2)

  -  [Category](#category)

# <a name='synopsis'></a>SYNOPSIS

package require Tcl 8.5  
package require clock::rfc2822 ?0.1?  

[__::clock::rfc2822 parse_date__ *date*](#1)  

# <a name='description'></a>DESCRIPTION

This package provides functionality to parse dates in RFC 2822 format.

  - <a name='1'></a>__::clock::rfc2822 parse_date__ *date*

    This command parses an RFC2822 date string and returns the given date in
    seconds since epoch. An error is thrown if the command is unable to parse
    the date.

# <a name='section2'></a>Bugs, Ideas, Feedback

This document, and the package it describes, will undoubtedly contain bugs and
other problems. Please report such in the category *clock::rfc2822* of the
[Tcllib Trackers](http://core.tcl.tk/tcllib/reportlist). Please also report any
ideas for enhancements you may have for either package and/or documentation.

When proposing code changes, please provide *unified diffs*, i.e the output of
__diff -u__.

Note further that *attachments* are strongly preferred over inlined patches.
Attachments can be made by going to the __Edit__ form of the ticket immediately
after its creation, and then using the left-most button in the secondary
navigation bar.

# <a name='category'></a>CATEGORY

Text processing
